DOC: Add `from_predictions` example and other details to `visualizations.rst` (#30825)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/visualizations.rst

learning. The key feature of this API is to allow for quick plotting and
visual adjustments without recalculation. We provide `Display` classes that
expose two methods for creating plots: `from_estimator` and
`from_predictions`.

The `from_estimator` method generates a `Display` object from a fitted estimator and input data (X, y).

> The `from_predictions` method creates a `Display` object when given the true and predicted values.
> This is useful when predictions should only be computed once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `from_predictions` method creates a `Display` object from true and predicted values, which
is useful when you only want to compute the predictions once.
```

nitpick, I think it would be nice to use the same phrasing, as these 2 method do the same thing, just with different inputs.

Author: Done

The `Display` object stores the computed values required for plotting with Matplotlib.
These values can either be passed directly via `from_predictions`, or derived from an estimator
and sample data using `from_estimator`.

> Additionally, the plot method allows adding to an existing plot via the ax parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the plot method allows adding to an existing plot by passing the existing
plots :class`matplotlib.axes.Axes` to the `ax` parameter.
```

nitpick. I think (?) that API reference should work but best to check the rendered docs

Author: This :class`matplotlib.axes.Axes` doesn't render well @lucyleeow : 

<img width="719" alt="Screenshot 2025-02-14 at 10 37 24" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/16201f48-12e3-4c2e-a582-22a6499340b9" />

Reviewer: Ah yes typo,
```
:class:`matplotlib.axes.Axes`
``` 
I missed a :

learning. The key feature of this API is to allow for quick plotting and
visual adjustments without recalculation. We provide `Display` classes that
expose two methods for creating plots: `from_estimator` and
`from_predictions`.

> The `from_estimator` method generates a `Display` object from a fitted estimator and input data (X, y).
> The `from_predictions` method creates a `Display` object from true and predicted values, which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `from_estimator` method generates a `Display` object from a fitted estimator and 
input data (`X`, `y`). The `from_predictions` method creates a `Display` object from
true and predicted values (`y_test`, `y_pred`), which
```
Just an idea: Would mentioning the arg names help for clarity?

Author: Thank you Stefanie. I added your suggestion.

> is useful when you only want to compute the predictions once.

Reviewer 3: I would like to add a small paragraph to discuss the pitfall of `from_predictions`.

`from_predictions` cannot resolve some ambiguities when it comes to the predictions while `from_estimator` allows us to have full control on how to generate the prediction and thus select the required part to compute the metric. As an example, `RocCurveDisplay.from_prediction` would require `y_pred` to be the probability of the positive label. So it means that a user would need to know which column corresponds to the positive label. With `from_estimator`, with the `pos_label` info and the `estimator.classes_` information, we exactly know of to slice the `y_pred` coming from the classifier.

So I think that a small paragraph to mention this would be nice: `from_predictions` avoid to recompute the predictions but does not automatically resolve some ambiguities.

> The `Display` object stores the computed values required for plotting with Matplotlib.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `Display` object stores the computed values (e.g. metric values) required for plotting with Matplotlib.
```

> These values can either be passed directly via `from_predictions`, or derived from an estimator

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These values are either passed directly to `from_predictions`, or derived from an estimator
```

> and sample data using `from_estimator`.

Reviewer 3: Uhm I'm a bit confused here. In the previous sentence, it looks like the "computed values" are related to the predictions rather then the derivative values from those predictions (e.g. metrics or feature importance).

So we pass the raw predictions to `from_predictions` or get them from the estimator via `from_estimator` and then compute some derivatives and those values are stored in the display. By doing so, we avoid to recompute them when we call the `plot` method.

> Additionally, the plot method allows adding to an existing plot by passing the existing

Reviewer 3: We need first to define what is the job of `plot` before mentioning that you can pass some argument, I think.

plots :class:`matplotlib.axes.Axes` to the `ax` parameter.

In the following example, we plot a ROC curve for a fitted support

> vector machine using `from_estimator`:

Reviewer 3: Could you make sure that we keep under 88 characters (we are not really checking on rst, but it is quite handy).

learning. The key feature of this API is to allow for quick plotting and
visual adjustments without recalculation. We provide `Display` classes that
expose two methods for creating plots: `from_estimator` and
`from_predictions`.

The `from_estimator` method generates a `Display` object from a fitted estimator and
input data (`X`, `y`).
The `from_predictions` method creates a `Display` object from true and predicted
values (`y_test`, `y_pred`), which
is useful when you only want to compute the predictions once. Using `from_predictions`
avoids to recompute the predictions, but does not automatically resolve some

> ambiguities.

Author: @lucyleeow I added your changes, but the way I wrote it was the way @glemaitre suggested.

The `Display` object stores the computed values (e.g., metric values or
feature importance) required for plotting with Matplotlib. These values are the

> derivative results after we pass the raw predictions to `from_predictions`, or

Author: @lucyleeow same here, I followed @glemaitre suggestion before yours. 
I'm clarifying, not complaining.

> derivative results after we pass the raw predictions to `from_predictions`, or

Reviewer: Sorry yes I didn't read the above suggestions, he didn't make a direct change suggestion though, so was not necessarily suggesting you follow his comment word for word.

an estimator to `from_estimator`.

Display objects have a plot method that creates a matplotlib plot once the display
object has been initialized. Additionally, the plot method allows adding to an existing

> plot by passing the existing plots :class:`matplotlib.axes.Axes` to the `ax` parameter.

Author: This was to address Guillaume's comment. Can you please tell me how it should be written?

> plot by passing the existing plots :class:`matplotlib.axes.Axes` to the `ax` parameter.

Author: @lucyleeow

> plot by passing the existing plots :class:`matplotlib.axes.Axes` to the `ax` parameter.

Reviewer: Not 100% what he means (for me `plot` is for adding curve to existing plot or changing existing curve, defined by the display object but not 100% on this), so can't make a suggestion sorry.

> plot by passing the existing plots :class:`matplotlib.axes.Axes` to the `ax` parameter.

Reviewer: Reading this again, I can see that this can mean 'once the display' is initialised within `from_prediction` or `from_estimator` and not initialised directly i.e.: `RocDisplayCurve()`, so maybe this is fine.
Though I am not sure we mention this distinction (I know we do say this in the docstring of the display classes - i.e. don't use this class directly...)

> plot by passing the existing plots :class:`matplotlib.axes.Axes` to the `ax` parameter.

Author: Per Guillaume I'll leave this as is.

In the following example, we plot a ROC curve for a fitted Logistic Regression
model `from_estimator`:

.. plot::
   :context: close-figs
   :align: center

    from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
    from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
    from sklearn.metrics import RocCurveDisplay
    from sklearn.datasets import load_iris

    X, y = load_iris(return_X_y=True)
    y = y == 2  # make binary
    X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
                                       X, y, test_size=.8, random_state=42
                                       )
    clf = LogisticRegression(random_state=42, C=.01)
    clf.fit(X_train, y_train)

    clf_disp = RocCurveDisplay.from_estimator(clf, X_test, y_test)

> If you already have the prediction values, you could instead use
> `from_predictions` to do the same thing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already have the prediction values, you could instead use
`from_predictions` to do the same thing (and save on compute):
```

Author: Done.

.. plot::
   :context: close-figs
   :align: center

    from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
    from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
    from sklearn.metrics import RocCurveDisplay
    from sklearn.datasets import load_iris

    X, y = load_iris(return_X_y=True)
    y = y == 2  # make binary
    X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
                                       X, y, test_size=.8, random_state=0
                                       )
    clf = LogisticRegression(random_state=42, C=.01)
    clf.fit(X_train, y_train)

    # select the probability of the class that we considered to be the positive label
    y_pred = clf.predict_proba(X_test)[:, 1]

    clf_disp = RocCurveDisplay.from_predictions(y_test, y_pred)

The returned `clf_disp` object allows us to continue using the already computed

> ROC curve for clf in future plots. In this case, the `clf_disp` is a

Reviewer: I am not sure what the original intent of this sentence is.
Does it mean that the display object `clf_disp` can be used to add another curve (for estimator `clf`) to a future plots?
Maybe we could improve the clarify of this...

Author: Done. 
(This was like that since the beginning, I had just changed the type of classifier).

Reviewer: Yes I saw that you didn't change this, but that does not stop us from improving. 
What was the original meaning of this part? Is it what I suggested or something else?

Author: I don't think you suggested how to improve this part.

---
> but that does not stop us from improving.

I know. I was just sharing information.

learning. The key feature of this API is to allow for quick plotting and
visual adjustments without recalculation. We provide `Display` classes that
expose two methods for creating plots: `from_estimator` and
`from_predictions`.

The `from_estimator` method generates a `Display` object from a fitted estimator and
input data (`X`, `y`).
The `from_predictions` method creates a `Display` object from true and predicted
values (`y_test`, `y_pred`). Using `from_predictions`

> avoids to recompute the predictions, but does not automatically resolve some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
avoids having to recompute the predictions, but does not automatically resolve some
```

I don't think the grammar was correct?

> ambiguities. The reason being that the user needs to know which column corresponds

Reviewer 3: I think that we should explain that the story about the `pos_label` is only for binary classification.

> to the positive label (in this case, `y_pred`).

Reviewer: Note that this is not the case for decision function where a 1d array is returned (you need to multiply by -1, if you wish to switch `pos_label`). This is why I used the wording I suggested. If you wish, you can go into detail about the adaption required for both proba and decision function, or simply leave as the wording i suggested.

Reviewer: The second sentence does not seem to naturally follow on from the first. The first talks about `from_predictions` not automatically solving ambiguities, and then the second explains what the user needs to do.

i.e. if you said in your first sentence, using `from_prediction` means that the user needs to resolve ambiguities, then the second sentence makes more sense.

The `Display` object stores the computed values (e.g., metric values or
feature importance) required for plotting with Matplotlib. These values are the
derived results after we pass the raw predictions to `from_predictions`, or
an estimator to `from_estimator`. When the `Display` object is created,
the plot is also created.

Display objects have a plot method that creates a matplotlib plot once the display
object has been initialized. Additionally, the plot method allows adding to an existing
plot by passing the existing plots :class:`matplotlib.axes.Axes` to the `ax` parameter.

In the following example, we plot a ROC curve for a fitted Logistic Regression
model `from_estimator`:

.. plot::
   :context: close-figs
   :align: center

    from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
    from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
    from sklearn.metrics import RocCurveDisplay
    from sklearn.datasets import load_iris

    X, y = load_iris(return_X_y=True)
    y = y == 2  # make binary

>     X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
>                                        X, y, test_size=.8, random_state=42
>                                        )

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
        X, y, test_size=.8, random_state=42
    )
```

    clf = LogisticRegression(random_state=42, C=.01)
    clf.fit(X_train, y_train)

    clf_disp = RocCurveDisplay.from_estimator(clf, X_test, y_test)

If you already have the prediction values, you could instead use
`from_predictions` to do the same thing (and save on compute):

.. plot::
   :context: close-figs
   :align: center

    from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
    from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
    from sklearn.metrics import RocCurveDisplay
    from sklearn.datasets import load_iris

    X, y = load_iris(return_X_y=True)
    y = y == 2  # make binary

>     X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
>                                        X, y, test_size=.8, random_state=42
>                                        )

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
        X, y, test_size=.8, random_state=42
    )
```

learning. The key feature of this API is to allow for quick plotting and
visual adjustments without recalculation. We provide `Display` classes that
expose two methods for creating plots: `from_estimator` and
`from_predictions`.

> The `from_estimator` method generates a `Display` object from a fitted estimator and
> input data (`X`, `y`).

Reviewer: what about?
```suggestion
The `from_estimator` method generates a `Display` object from a fitted estimator and
input data (`X`, `y`), and a plot.
```

> The `from_predictions` method creates a `Display` object from true and predicted
> values (`y_test`, `y_pred`), which is useful when you only want to compute the
> predictions once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `from_predictions` method creates a `Display` object from true and predicted
values (`y_test`, `y_pred`), and a plot.
```
we do talk about re-computing just below.

> For :term:`predict_proba`, the column corresponding to the probability estimate of

Reviewer: I think we should mention that `from_predictions` prevents re-computing predictions. We had mentioned this twice previously but now we don't mention it once. I think the previous sentence here was fine, just minor tweaking:

"Using `from_predictions` avoids having to recompute predictions, but the user
needs to take care that the prediction values passed corresponding to the `pos_label`."

Using `from_predictions` avoids having to recompute predictions, but does not
automatically resolve some ambiguities. For binary classification, the user must know

> which column corresponds to the positive label (in this case, `y_pred`).

Reviewer: Not sure what your thoughts are on this @glemaitre  but for decision_function, I thought we only returned one column? And we need to multiply by -1 if we wanted to switch pos_label?
I don't love the phrase "resolve some ambiguities", I would prefer something direct like, "must pass prediction values corresponding to the `pos_label`, for binary classification. For probabilities this means....For decision function values this means..."

Author: @lucyleeow do you agree with the last sentence from Guillaume?

Reviewer: Hmm tricky, because the positive label is not always `1` right? E.g., data input to an estimator, the binary labels are not always 0,1, they could be any other 2 values right?

That's why I used the term 'switch labels' though I can see that this is not 100% clear either...

The `Display` object stores the computed values (e.g., metric values or

> feature importance) required for plotting with Matplotlib. These values are the
> derived results after we pass the raw predictions to `from_predictions`, or
> an estimator to `from_estimator`. When the `Display` object is created,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
feature importance) required for plotting with Matplotlib. These values the
results derived from the raw predictions passed to `from_predictions`, or
an estimator and `X` passed to `from_estimator`. When the `Display` object is created,
```

nit, personal preference in phrasing. Happy if you ignore

> an estimator to `from_estimator`. When the `Display` object is created,
> the plot is also created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an estimator to `from_estimator`.
```
if we already add that a plot is created above.

> Display objects have a plot method that creates a matplotlib plot once the display
> object has been initialized. Additionally, the plot method allows adding to an existing

Reviewer: I would add a note like
```suggestion
Display objects have a plot method that creates a matplotlib plot once the display
object has been initialized (note that we recommend that display objects are created
via `from_estimator` or `from_predictions` instead of initialized directly). The plot
method allows adding to an existing
```

learning. The key feature of this API is to allow for quick plotting and
visual adjustments without recalculation. We provide `Display` classes that
expose two methods for creating plots: `from_estimator` and
`from_predictions`.

The `from_estimator` method generates a `Display` object from a fitted estimator,
input data (`X`, `y`), and a plot.
The `from_predictions` method creates a `Display` object from true and predicted
values (`y_test`, `y_pred`), and a plot. Using `from_predictions` avoids having to
recompute predictions, but the user needs to take care that the prediction values

> passed correspond to the `pos_label`.

Reviewer: > Using `from_predictions` avoids having to
recompute predictions, but the user needs to take care that the prediction values
passed correspond to the `pos_label`.

Maybe this sentence could go at the start of the paragraph below? It seems to fit with the below paragraph better.

> For :term:`predict_proba`, the column corresponding to the probability estimate of
> the `pos_label` class is selected while for :term:`decision_function`, the score is
> reverted (i.e. multiply by -1) when `pos_label` is not the label 1.

Reviewer: Again, I don't know if 0,1 / -1,1 are always the classification labels? Could it not be e.g., 0 and 2 ? In which case it does not make sense when you say > `pos_label` is not the label 1. See the decision function glossary entry: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/glossary.html#term-decision_function

```suggestion
For :term:`predict_proba`, select the column corresponding to the
the `pos_label` class while for :term:`decision_function`, revert the
score (i.e. multiply by -1) if `pos_label` is not the last class in the
`classes_` attribute of your estimator.
```

The wording for decision function is a bit tricky honestly. Maybe it could be improved but is technically correct.

    svc_disp = RocCurveDisplay.from_estimator(svc, X_test, y_test)

If you already have the prediction values, you could instead use
`from_predictions` to do the same thing:

.. plot::
   :context: close-figs
   :align: center

   from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
   from sklearn.svm import SVC
   from sklearn.metrics import RocCurveDisplay
   from sklearn.datasets import load_wine

   X, y = load_wine(return_X_y=True)
   y = y == 2  # make binary
   X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, random_state=42)
   svc = SVC(random_state=42).fit(X_train, y_train)
   y_pred = svc.decision_function(X_test)

>    svc_disp = RocCurveDisplay.from_predictions(y_test, y_pred)

Reviewer 3: Let's modify the example and use `LogisticRegression` instead of `SVC`. Also let's use the `predict_proba` where in the `from_predictions` we need to add a comment that we select the positive classes:

```python
# select the probability of the class that we considered to be the positive label
y_pred_pos_label = model.predict_proba[:, 1]
RocCurveDisplay.from_predictions(y_test, y_pred_pos_label)
```

> The returned `svc_disp` object allows us to continue using the already computed

Reviewer: What do you think about adding the `from_predictions` example here. 

We could just say e.g., "If you already have the prediction values, you could instead use `from_predictions` to do the same thing: ...

Author: Done

Notice that we pass `alpha=0.8` to the plot functions to adjust the alpha
values of the curves.

> 

Reviewer 2: Do we need to add these here?

Author: No we don't, I removed them. They don't hurt either because they don't get rendered.
But you are right, I added them as an old reflex..

Thank you for checking. :-)
